docs: retrieval research rfc (#623)
eigerco/polka-storage: rfcs/002-data-retrieval.md

# RFC-002 Data Retrieval

Author: Rok Černič — @cernicc
Date: 16/12/24

This document aggregates research done on the topic of retrieving stored data
from the storage providers. It does not cover the retrieval markets and assumes
that no additional incentives are needed for being part of the retrieval network
and that every storage provider also provides a retrieval service. It also
covers the main protocols for transfer — Bitswap and GraphSync — recommending
the implementation of Bitswap as a first instance due to the lower upfront
effort required.

## Problem statement

> We would like to support 3rd parties to retrieve data from the storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We would like to enable 3rd parties to retrieve data from the storage
```

> providers. To retrieve the data stored, they should provide payload CID (root

Reviewer: ```suggestion
providers. To retrieve the data stored, they should provide the payload CID (root
```

node of the CAR file).

## Storage provider server

The current server implementation exposes an endpoint which allows 3rd parties
to upload some content. The content is then encoded as a CAR file; the file is
then packed into the unsealed sector, stored on disk; the unsealed sector is
sealed and stored on disk; the sealed sector is unreadable, as such for a
purposes of data retrieval, we either keep the unsealed sector around at the
cost of storage capacity or unseal sectors on-demand — for the purposes of POC

> we expect that the unsealed sector is always available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we expect the unsealed sector to always be available.
```

### Local Index Directory

As part of the storage server there is a need for a local index directory
subsystem. Sectors are opaque, meaning they don't contain metadata that
indicates where its files start and end, that is where the index enters, mapping
the sector and enabling retrieval of individual files.

### Storage provider server - retrieval provider

The retrieval process requires access to the local index and the unsealed
sectors, thus, it must be co-located with the storage process.

#### Bitswap

Bitswap is used to exchange blocks of data between peers. In short, it works on
a "question and answer" basis, where the client request the data for a given CID
and the server replies with that data, be it more CIDs or an actual block of
data. When coupled with IPLD graphs, this approach becomes "chatty" for large
files; since the first rounds of the protocol will usually consist of requesting
a CID and getting N CIDs back, requesting each of those CIDs and getting more
back, until reaching actual data blocks.

#### GraphSync

> It is used to synchronize graphs across peers. It uses IPLD selector to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is used to synchronize graphs across peers. It uses IPLD selectors to
```

efficiently transfer graphs (or selections of parts of graphs) with a minimal

> number of independent requests. It supersedes the Bitswap, because the client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number of independent requests. It supersedes Bitswap, because the client
```

only needs to send a single query request. The server then knows that the block
is part of some tree and returns all relative blocks back to the client.

## Retrieval client

> The retrieval clients enable 3rd parties to easily retrieve stored data. Good

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The retrieval clients enable 3rd parties to easily retrieve stored data. A good
```

example of the retrieval client is Lassie which can be used as a CLI, library or
HTTP server.

When used, the client temporarily becomes a node in the same network as the
retrieval provider above. The client first queries the indexer (do not confuse
with the Local Index Directory) for retrieval candidates (storage providers).

> After it receives 1 or more candidates it sends a retrieval request to those

Reviewer: It may be confused with an L in some fonts, this way is clearer
```suggestion
After it receives one or more candidates it sends a retrieval request to those
```

## Conclusion

This document covered the key technical challenge when implementing retrievals
for a system like Polka Storage, as well as the main contenders for the
retrieval protocol — Bitswap and GraphSync.

Both protocols have their strengths:

1. Bitswap is widely implemented, including in Rust, making it a practical
   choice for quick implementation in a proof-of-concept (POC).
2. GraphSync offers more efficient graph synchronization and selective data
   retrieval, which could be beneficial for larger files, but currently there is
   no good enough implementation in Rust.

For the immediate future and POC development, implementing Bitswap appears to be
the most pragmatic approach due to its existing Rust implementation and
straightforward nature. However, as the system evolves and scales, it may be
worthwhile to consider implementing GraphSync for its advanced features and
efficiency.

## References

- https://boost.filecoin.io/deployment/local-index-directory
- https://docs.ipfs.tech/concepts/bitswap/
- https://ipld.io/specs/transport/graphsync/
- https://github.com/ipld/ipld/blob/master/specs/transport/graphsync/index.md
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tpqXUmokFZ0

> - https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie

Reviewer: As is, this is just a collection of links, ideally we have bits of text leading to link itself

# RFC-002 Data Retrieval

> 

Reviewer: Add author and date

This document aggregates research done on the topic of retrieving stored data
from the storage providers. We didn't research the retrieval markets here and we
assume that no additional incentives are needed for being part of the retrieval
network. We assume that every storage provider also provides a retrieval

> service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the storage providers. It does not cover the retrieval markets and assumes
that no additional incentives are needed for being part of the retrieval
network and that every storage provider also provides a retrieval service.
It also covers the main protocols for transfer — Bitswap and GraphSync — recommending
the implementation of Bitswap as a first instance due to the lower upfront effort required.
```

Reviewer: And even so, I believe that running a retrieval service should be required

## Problem statement

We would like to support 3rd parties to retrieve data from the storage

> providers. To retrieve the data stored, they should provide content CID (root

Reviewer: Content CID is a redundancy: https://proto.school/anatomy-of-a-cid/01
```suggestion
providers. To retrieve the data stored, they should provide a CID (root
```

node of the CAR file).

## Storage provider server

> The current server implementation exposes the endpoint which allows 3rd parties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current server implementation exposes an endpoint which allows 3rd parties
```

to upload some content. That content is then encoded as a CAR file. That files
are then packed into the unsealed sector which is stored on disk. The unsealed
sector is sealed and also stored on disk. The sealed sector is unreadable that
is why for a purposes of data retrieval we also need an unsealed sector. For the

> purposes of POC we expect that the unsealed sector is always available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to upload some content. The content is then encoded as a CAR file; the file
is then packed into the unsealed sector, stored on disk; the unsealed
sector is sealed and stored on disk; the sealed sector is unreadable, as such
for a purposes of data retrieval, we either keep the unsealed sector around at the cost of storage capacity or unseal sectors on-demand — for the
purposes of POC we expect that the unsealed sector is always available.
```

### Local Index Directory

As part of the storage server there is a need for a local index directory
subsystem. The reason is because the unsealed sector doesn't contain any
information about location of the CAR files. Without the indexer, the client
would be able to retrieve only entire sectors. The indexer would allow us to
target the retrieval of specific CAR file or even a specific blocks in the CAR

> file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subsystem. Sectors are opaque, meaning they don't contain metadata that indicates where its files start and end,
that is where the index enters, mapping the sector and enabling retrieval of individual files.
```

### Storage provider server - retrieval provider

The process which provides retrievals should have access to the local index and
also to the unsealed sectors data. So we expect the process to be running on the
same machine or have access to the same storage device used by the provider. The
local index is used to find the sector which contains the requested data and

> where exactly is that data located in the sector.

Reviewer: There's no need to repeat that the LID is used to find the sectors

```suggestion
The retrieval process requires access to the local index and the unsealed sectors, thus, 
it must be co-located with the storage process.
```

#### Bitswap

The protocol is used to exchange blocks of data between peers. The downside is
that the whole CAR file needs to be retrived as a single block. Usually the
protocol is noisy because it uses a lot of small requests to ask the peers which
blocks they have. In our scenario this is not a problem because the connected

> retrieval provider always has the file that the client was looking for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bitswap is used to exchange blocks of data between peers. In short, it works
on a "question and answer" basis, where the client request the data for a given CID and
the server replies with that data, be it more CIDs or an actual block of data.
When coupled with IPLD graphs, this approach becomes "chatty" for large files; 
since the first rounds of the protocol will usually consist of requesting a CID and getting N CIDs back,
requesting each of those CIDs and getting more back, until reaching actual data blocks.
```

#### GraphSync

It is used to synchronize graphs across peers. It uses IPLD selector to
efficiently transfer graphs (or selections of parts of graphs) with a minimal

> number of independent requests.

Reviewer: A more detailed explanation of the protocol would be a great addition, especially covering why it eventually supersedes Bitswap

## Retrieval client

The retrieval clients enable 3rd parties to easily retrieve stored data. Good
example of the retrieval client is Lassie. It can be used as a CLI, library or

> http server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example of the retrieval client is Lassie which can be used as a CLI, library or
HTTP server.
```

When used, the client temporarily becomes a node in the same network as the

> retrieval provider above. The client first queries the indexer (Do not confuse

Reviewer: ```suggestion
retrieval provider above. The client first queries the indexer (do not confuse
```

with the Local Index Directory) for retrieval candidates (storage providers).
After it receives 1 or more candidates it sends a retrieval request to those
providers. The request is done over the P2P network using Graphsync or Bitswap.
It depends on the protocol which the provider supports.

## Conclusion

> This document has explored various aspects of data retrieval in the Polka
> ecosystem, focusing on the storage provider server, local index directory,
> retrieval protocols, and retrieval clients. We've examined two primary protocols
> for data transfer between peers: Bitswap and GraphSync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document covered the key technical challenge when implementing retrievals for a system like Polka Storage,
as well as the main contenders for the retrieval protocol — Bitswap and GraphSync.
```
